# Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, the goal is to build an ETL pipeline that extracts the data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms the data into a set of dimensional tables for the analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

# Datasets

There are two datasets we are working with here -

1. Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. The columns in each file are given below -

artist_id
artist_latitude
artist_location
artist_longitude
artist_name
duration
num_songs
song_id
title
year

2. Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. The columns in each file are given below -

artist              
auth            
firstName       
gender           
itemInSession   
lastName        
length          
level           
location        
method          
page            
registration    
sessionId       
song            
status          
ts              
userAgent       
userId

# Schema Design 

Given that Sparkify wants to better understand the behavior of the users on their music platform, a star schema with a fact table that contains details on the song plays and related dimension tables is a good schema design here. As such, we will have the following tables -

- Fact Table

    - songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong (songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent)

- Dimension Tables

    - users - users in the app (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level)
    - songs - songs in music database (song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration)
    - artists - artists in music database (artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude)
    - time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units (start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday)

# Project Template

The project template includes four files:

    - create_table.py - to create the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift
    - etl.py - to load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into the analytics tables on Redshift
    - sql_queries.py - to define the SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above
    - README.md - to provide discussion on your process and decisions for this ETL pipeline

# Project Steps

Below are steps we can take to complete each component of this project.

- Create Table Schemas
Design schemas for the fact and dimension tables
Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. 
Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in the redshift database. We can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.

- Build ETL Pipeline
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare the results with the expected results.
Delete the redshift cluster when finished.

# Instructions to Run Files

After completing the sql_queries.py file and updating the dwh.cfg file with the Redshift cluster details, we can log into the terminal and run create_tables.py first followed by etl.py. If there are no errors, the tables should be populated in the Redshift database